I want to thank Andrew Henderson from
Nomad capitalist for joining us today
Andrew thank you for coming on my
pleasure today we are going to talk
about all things related to geopolitics
we're going to look at second
citizenships and there's a lot of
mystery behind this topic there's a lot
of um let's just call them people in the
shadows and you know these un unknown
subjects and they start to get a lot of
people that are not exactly the most
legitimate behind it and I wanted to
talk about the very first topic is as an
American what are the options can people
even get a second citizenship can they
get another residence or are they going
to be stuck with that for the rest of
their
lives well you're not only are you not
stuck with it but there's many options I
think people don't often understand how
many citizens you can have and they've
heard about dual citizenship you know
I've got three adopted sisters they came
over they became dual citizens like
people understood that um in most
countries if you can have dual
citizenship you can have unlimited
citizenships there's a few exceptions
where if you have three or more you have
to start reporting it but most for the
most part you know the US Canada
Australia more recently um the UK all
those you can have multiple different
citizenships um when I left the US I
forget how many I had I know three or
four now I've got five I actually gave
up the US citizenship so I've got five
and and might you know get more from
there um so you can have multiple
citizenships now the requirement is that
each of them would allow you uh to have
that so if you get citizenship by
investment where you're making a
donation you're buying property you're
doing something like that I mean they're
kind of in the business of granting
citizenship so obviously they're not
going to force you to uh give up your
other citizenships or else they wouldn't
have as many takers citizenship by
descent where you your family tree
grandma was from Italy great-grandfather
was from Slovakia whatever um that
generally most of those countries allow
you I mean Lithuania is a little squirly
uh as I found out myself uh but you know
most of these ways to get citizenship
you can have one you can have two you
can have five you can have 10 the thing
that Americans don't realize is if
you're an American you're an American
you can choose to give up your US
citizenship if you just want to save
money on taxes you can move to Puerto
Rico and you can lower your taxes there
um but if you're an American you are an
American so it's not like I mean if you
open a bank account uh you have to
report that bank account if you open a
foreign corporation you have to report
that corporation uh and so you can't say
well I opened that bank account as a
malti citizen because I went to Malta
and got their million dooll give or take
citizenship an American's an American
and is an American um even if you're not
even if your citizenship is not an issue
you know Americans are taxed no matter
where they live uh I lived all over the
world I didn't spend any time in the US
and I was able to basically exclude all
of my income and defer the rest of it um
that's a little harder now but it's
still largely possible you can still
reduce your taxes dramatically by living
overseas but you can never escape the US
tax system even in Puerto Rico you're
still on the hook for all the foreign
filings and all that um and so you know
even if you're Canadian even if you're
Australian and you live in those
countries you may have reporting
requirements for doing other things but
very simply yes you can get multiple
citizenships that does not mean that
you've given up your current citizenship
and again for Americans doesn't mean
you've given up those rights but what
you want to understand is the difference
between residence and citizenship a
residence let you live somewhere
generally for a certain period of time
it's not quite as secure citizenship is
you're one of us you have all the rights
and Privileges and so I think that
generally you want to either get
citizenships or residences that lead to
citizenship even in some cases if you
don't live there so there's a lot of
different things you want to consider um
but I think every American needs a
second passport I think increasingly
Canadians Australians others need a
second passport because you never know
when that first passport is going to be
a
hindrance okay so for a lot of people
I've talked about this topic before and
some would say look I'm an American I
work a nine-to-five job I have lived in
such and such City for the last 30 years
I'm not moving I have this is where my
job is this is where my family is um I'm
sure you've dealt with those particular
situations before are there options for
them you know what what can they do at
all if anything yeah I mean certainly
one of the most common ways that people
become a citizen of a country is they
live there and they pay taxes and they
learn the language and then you go and
you see like the Naturalization
ceremonies everybody raise your right
hand and they swear everybody in
together and now you're a citizen
congratulations um if you don't want to
leave and you're saying my goodness I
think this country is going in the wrong
direction they're going to take more of
our money um you know there was an
article about Canada recently they said
you know is civil unrest coming those
weren't my words that was what I think
the police were suggesting is that
coming if you're worried about whatever
let's call it Black Swan events taking
place or even events that are pretty
predictable like your taxes are probably
going to go up most Western countries
are broke they're probably going to
raise your taxes eventually if you have
anything of
consequence um yeah so there's there's
programs you can get citizenship without
having to move so let's go through the
you know if you're lucky enough probably
the most affordable way to do that is
citizenship by descent um through your
family tree this is the one alart
service that we offer people because I
just figure hey there's plenty of
Americans Canadians Australians they
have someone in the family tree and if
they just want that back up we will it's
the only thing we do on its own and so
you can go back you know if your if your
dad was British for example that's about
as far back as you can go in most cases
in a country like the UK uh or in Canada
um but you get into Europe and some of
the Latin American countries you can go
to a grandparent like in Ireland you can
go to a great grandparent like in Italy
you can even go back further in like
Slovakia so most Caribbean and European
countries and a lot of the Latin
American countries let you go back at
least some number of years and you can
basically say hey my great-grandfather
was Italian and as long as in some cases
you can prove that like nobody ever gave
it up and it was never lost through the
chain you can go back and reclaim that
and so it may not be the fastest way to
do it but pound for pound it's the it's
the the best value because an Italian
passport for example lets you live
anywhere in the European Union as well
as Switzerland and Norway and Iceland so
you got like 30 countries that you can
live in so even if you're like oh my
ancestors were Bulgarian I don't want to
go to Bulgaria right a Bulgarian can
live in Spain can live in Switzerland
can live in Ireland and so you've got a
lot of options kind of like States or
provinces in Canada you can move around
you've got countries which by the way
there are plenty of good tax deals in
Europe so if you're Bulgarian by descent
you can move to Italy or Greece or
Switzerland or Ireland or Malta or
Cypress and even though their headline
tax rates may be high you might be able
to pay very very little as a percentage
because they have a special deal for new
people and so that's the easiest thing
to do is check your your family tree I
would also say let's say you're born in
Toronto I'm born right across the the
lake in Cleveland what if my parent was
born in Toronto by happen stance well by
virtue of citizenship by birth on the
soil my parent would be Canadian and
we've had that with Canada and Mexico
they never even realized their parent
was Canadian or Mexican which means they
can be Canadian or Mexican um so that's
the first thing otherwise you can make a
donation citizenship by investment in
the Caribbean has been one of the
cheapest ways to do it you don't have to
go there although there is now an
interview requirement they just did
double the price though because the
Western countries are getting upset that
people have this option that for years
for $100,000 you could get a second
passport and you could leave your
country forever and no no longer owe
them anything and under the threat of
security and uh maybe there's a
terrorist coming in you know I'm pretty
Pro migration but you know Nigel farage
is speaking at our event this year ask
him how many boats are coming to Europe
we're not we're not checking those
people but the guy with lots of money
who goes through a rigorous background
check we can't we can't get that so
because of the the Europe the threats
from Europe the price of citizenship by
investment in the Caribbean doubled it's
going to cost you $200,000 and up but
those are the two main ways the third
way is more exploratory and that is you
can get what's called a paper residence
where the country requires you to live
there for X number of years but they
don't Define living and so it could be
you go one day a year which is the
requirement to keep the resident's
permit active acve but when you apply
for citizenship they don't ask how long
you've been in the country you may have
to speak the
language um but in some of the Latin
American countries that's a little
easier than let's say you know learning
azer bani or something you know um those
aren't guaranteed though so that's kind
of a cheaper path for let's you're say
the N9 to-5 person but you know are you
lucky do you have
$200,000 uh or um you know do uh do you
want to kind of gamble those are the
ways without moving
one of the aspects which we can discuss
is we're talking about second
citizenships we're talking about
passports
and I think for a lot of people they
don't understand the reason even why
they would do so I mean I've tried to
bring that up on my channel you know
over and over again um people would say
I've talked to people saying um you know
why don't you get your Italian
citizenship I mean you know you can get
it through your parents I mean it's it's
pretty cheap this and that and they
would say you know what I'm not going to
live there I'm not going to go there I'm
here I'm here and I I don't think that
people understand number one that it's
it's relatively cheap um the fact that
it could be it's a process that takes a
long time too it's not necessarily
something that okay when I'm ready I'm
going to just snap my fingers it's going
to come to me so you got to plan it
ahead but also the world is changing and
we're moving in a place place from west
to east and right right at that kind of
Middle East line and we see the the the
global growth going there we see the
population growing there and everything
like that and I wonder if you could talk
more about this and your travels you you
travel all around the world and you see
and you talk to different people if you
mind sharing couple things come to mind
first of all I was sitting last summer
in Tuscany with a very successful
gentleman who said when I bought uh this
Villa big beautiful I mean spread that
he has and he said I didn't realize as
an American I couldn't just come to
Italy and stay as long as I
wanted it's a very successful educated
guy and I think a lot of Americans in
particular don't re don't realize that
they just think I don't need a visa to
go anywhere I could just go and live as
long as I want it's like no you get 90
of 180 days now you can get a residence
permit or you can just go and get a
citizenship let's say Malta that's the
more expensive version bu in it's going
to cost about a million dollars for your
family but now you can live anywhere in
Europe and so yeah if you have Italian
ancestry and you can claim that passport
uh we're going to be a little bit more
on the expensive side but you're going
to pay us one or two percent maybe 3% if
you got a big family of what you'd pay
for Malta same same passport same
ability to live anywhere in Europe um
yeah I I'll take the 98% cheaper option
um and so I think that people don't
realize what they need to travel
somewhere else uh and they say oh I'm
happy here well uh if you live in North
America you have ancestors more than
likely that came from somewhere and I
think kind of putting yourself in their
shoes and realizing at some point they
had to make a
decision uh you know they wanted better
opportunities they wanted more freedom
they felt oppressed and so they said I'm
going to I'm going to leave and go to
this place what did I say go where
you're treated best those are my five
magic words they went where they were
treated best or where they imagined they
would be treated
best and there's going to come a time I
mean people who say I'm I'm here in the
US I'll leave when things get bad enough
look at the last 25 years if you were
being objective don't you think this
been the government spying on you like I
mean all this stuff has happened in the
last 25 years really like you think at
no point with an objective person have
said okay fine now things are bad enough
I'll leave when things are bad enough is
basically I'm going to keep being the
Frog and The Boiling Pot and just saying
oh this is this is this is a good
temperature this is comfortable
um I I just think and and you know we
were talking before are most of the
clients Americans at this point we're
pretty well distributed I think we're
like 22% or something in the last
quarter we Americans and we love the
Americans and they're great clients but
we got folks from all over the world who
realize things are going in the wrong
direction and what I
learn uh we have our annual event in
Malaysia I've lived in Malaysia
part-time for 11 years um Wen is a nicer
city than some in the United States at
least the places you would go right and
you don't you don't go to the bad parts
of your city already so like oh I hear
the bad part of qualum poor is a real
dump it's like yeah the bad part of
Chicago is a dump
too um and so I can tell you what's
Malaysia doing they want to join bricks
and what's their argument it's very
trumpan we're tired of being told by the
US to benefit only them hey just be our
side trust us same thing Africa is
saying you guys come and you give us a
lecture China comes gives us a hospital
guess we're putting M it's Malaysia
first it's you know it's it's Rwanda
first it's everything that people and
you know
I'm I I don't agree with either side in
the US I'm politically homeless but if
you are pro America first then you
should be Pro those countries being
themselves first and the deal that
they're getting from the Western world
is not good so they're going to go where
they're treated best as well
and so I think the quality of living is
better there the optimism is better
there wages are going up I hire people
I've got almost 100 people working here
from all around the world it is a lot
more expensive than it was um everywhere
but certainly in the emerging world uh
than it was you know five six seven
years ago it's a lot more expensive now
because there's just so many more
opportunities out there and they have
something to look forward to as opposed
to in the west where they're just
looking for like everything's kind of
falling apart and it's you can't just be
American and be on Easy Street anymore
you actually have to like do something
and that's kind of bothering people and
there's right so I mean all that to say
I I wouldn't if I'm American just get my
Italian passport I would make that part
of a portfolio I'm just talking we have
what called the chief knowledge officer
here and they handle all of our R&D
everything we do about knowledge we I
think we know more than any other
company out there about this stuff
and we're talking about African
passports that may that be your first
second passport um there are a few that
have opened up if you're if you're
African-American or African Canadian
like you you know they're opening up but
um I think people should consider some
of those buy a house in Egypt get
citizenship sell it in five years you've
got that passport for life and you've
got an insurance policy that's
non-western now because I agree with you
Asia is a very hard place to get
citizenship but um with bricks and
multipolarity I want some options that
are different and I'll give you this
last
point if I'm a US citizen and I run
businesses not only am I subject even if
I don't live in the US to all kinds of
us regulations
because they feel like they own me which
should tell you
something
but look at the trade Wars they're
talking about look at oh Tik Tok we're
going to take it
over I like to do business a lot of
places and what happens when you see
more places like China that they're
going to say oh we don't want Americans
coming here now the Americans are like
yeah well we're still the best you know
beat our chest like okay girl we don't
need you okay well where's all the
growth in the world it's not in the West
so if you want to sell your stuff I just
mentioned we went from I think a
probably an all-time high of 70% or I
don't know 60% American clients down to
22% I didn't I don't have fewer
Americans I just have more of everybody
else and to me that's a way to grow a
business by the way if there's a
recession in the US there won't be a
recession probably everywhere so I I'll
be more resistant that would be harder
to do as an American than as a St Lucian
where people as a St Lucian be okay come
on in American hey we're sick of you
guys pushing us around so those are all
the reasons why you want to be
prepared there's a lot of uh perhaps it
was in your book but companies that
simply don't want to deal with the
financial Regulators of the United
States and they're just saying you know
whether whether it's crypto companies or
whatever they're just saying yeah we're
not GNA we're not going to deal with you
uh you know we'd rather not even have
your business because it's just too
difficult to the regulations
um and certainly Canada's basically the
same thing in in a different way I mean
I'm sure there's plenty of Bad actors in
crypto and you know my my father's the
most honest guy I know he raised me to
do the right thing and he said he's very
strict like you got to do the right
thing you got to Ser you gotta treat
people right but my goodness every time
I go on the crypto news sites it's like
everybody in their dog is being sued by
the secc like really these guys are all
terrible people like really it's like no
it's it's going against their power and
they don't like it and that's one reason
why I wouldn't be in the country and I
wouldn't be a citizen quite frankly if
I'm in a new technology like that I mean
I just had an interview that I did
recently with one of the first guys like
back in the 90s to renounce US
citizenship he was into cryptography and
it was illegal back then in the US so he
went where he was treated best and he
went to anguila uh this little island in
the
Caribbean and so um yeah there are banks
around the world that just don't want
Americans not this idea that nowhere for
an American to get a bank account that's
nonsense we help Americans get bank
accounts all the time they often aren't
as functional like you can't make
investments in a private bank in
Singapore for example because they don't
comply with SEC regulations so they
can't you just keep your cash there but
you can get a bank account but yeah the
US has put so many regulations with
what's called fatka now the world has
kind of copied that with um their own
information sharing regime but I'll tell
you it was very telling I met with I
went to a dinner for a bank that I uh I
have an with and they did a road show
and they came through gual and po when I
was there and I asked the banker I said
confirm a suspicion I have you'd rather
have a wealthy Indonesian than a wealthy
American all day long she said not even
a competition and here are the Americans
being like everyone wants American money
I mean they literally say that not our
clients but like you hear people like
people always take American money it's
like no they won't like we have to like
listen it it feels nice to be wanted no
doubt about it I like to live in reality
the reality is most places do not care
there are more I mean we've had we've
had Indonesian Vietnamese Egyptian
Brazilian clients all CTI
millionaires wouldn't you rather take
their $100 million with very few
regulations and be able to sell them
more services and make more money than
take an American where if you fill out
one form wrong your whole bank it's
thrown into limbo I mean why would you
want to put up with that um and by the
way Americans you know I mean you can go
to Georgia and open an account as an
American but you know that's that's
that's your option for a cheap bank
account if you want to go to Singapore
it's six figures if you want to go to
Switzerland it's seven figures because
that's the price they need to charge you
uh you know for deposits uh for them to
bother with making sure they have enough
people to do the paperwork right so the
US doesn't Ace them out of the entire
dollar
system and so uh it is getting harder
crypto we've seen the same thing people
got second passports and suddenly they
were able to invest there are mutual
funds there are various funds I've got a
guy who runs a property Fund in Cambodia
that I invest in he can't have more than
50%
Americans uh other funds don't take
Americans at all other I've had
Americans calling saying I can't get
into this crypto deal they won't take us
residents or they won't take uh people
who only have a US passport or who live
in the US you've got to have an overseas
address it's so much risk and again I
say to
myself
um yeah why do you want to deal with
Americans with that threat of dealing
with the US government if there's so
many people out there
who are
wealthy and you don't see this living in
the US or Canada but I see it traveling
I see it working with them I see it
hearing from them we go to events around
the world there are more and more
wealthy people in the countries that you
snub your nose at than you would
imagine and I think that's the future